Temsirolimus in mantle cell lymphoma and other non-Hodgkin lymphoma subtypes
Temsirolimus, an inhibitor of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), has anti-tumor activity in patients with relapsed or refractory mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) and other mature lymphoid neoplasms. mTOR is an intracellular kinase that controls the mRNA translation of many proteins (eg, cyclin D1) that can act as oncogenes and contribute to lymphomagenesis. Characterized by overexpression of cyclin D1, MCL was identified as a disease that might be susceptible to mTOR inhibition. When single-agent temsirolimus was explored in two phase II studies for treatment of patients with relapsed or refractory MCL, it demonstrated anti-tumor activity, with overall response rates of 38% and 41%. Subsequently, a three-arm, randomized phase III trial was conducted to compare two dosing regimens of temsirolimus with investigator's choice of therapy for heavily pretreated patients with relapsed or refractory MCL (N = 162; randomized 1:1:1). Once-weekly intravenous temsirolimus 175 mg for 3 weeks followed by 75 mg once weekly (175/75) significantly improved progression-free survival (hazard ratio = 0.44; P = .0009) versus investigator's choice therapy. Median progression-free survival durations were 4.8 and 1.9 months, respectively. The objective response rates were 22% in the 175/75 group and 2% in the investigator's choice group (P = .0019). For patients receiving temsirolimus, the most frequent grade 3 or 4 adverse events were thrombocytopenia, anemia, neutropenia, and asthenia. The results of this trial established a recommended clinical dose for temsirolimus monotherapy in patients with relapsed or refractory MCL and validated the importance of mTOR in the pathogenesis of advanced MCL. Objective responses also have been reported for other mature B-cell neoplasms (eg, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma or follicular lymphoma) in the phase II setting. Temsirolimus as monotherapy or in combination with other active agents warrants further investigation for treatment of MCL and other non-Hodgkin lymphomas. 